In this lecture, we're going to cover Layer 3 of the OSI model, which is the Network Layer. The Network
Layer is responsible for routing packets to their destination on the network,
so this is why routers operate at the Network Layer, and it's also responsible for Quality of Service as well.
What Quality of Service is, you might have
one particular type of traffic that requires a better level of service than another level of traffic.
For example, if you're running voice or video over IP, it's sensitive to delay.
So, we're going to give it better Quality of Service than something like email. IP, Internet Protocol, is
the best known Layer 3 protocol. IPv4 is the focus of this section. There's also IPv6 as well,
which is the upgrade for IPv4. Later on, throughout the course,
we'll be talking about why we have IPv6, and also its actual usage today, and how to configure it.
IP is a connectionless protocol,
so there's no acknowledgements at Layer 3. You can still have reliable traffic by using TCP and
its acknowledgements at Layer 4 or by having it built into the upper layers. Other Layer 3 protocols
apart from IP include ICMP, which is the Internet Control Message Protocol, which is used for ping, for
troubleshooting, which we'll also be talking about later in the course, and also IPSec for secure
encrypted communications.
There are other protocols as well, but IP is the best known one, by far the most commonly used.
That's what we're going to be talking about in this entire section. IP addressing is a logical addressing
scheme which is implemented at Layer 3. The network designer uses IP addressing to partition the overall
network into smaller subnetworks, or commonly called subnets. By having different subnets,
it improves performance and security and makes troubleshooting easier. It improves performance because
rather than having one big flat network, we divide it into smaller subnets, and we can keep the traffic on
the particular subnet that it needs to be on rather than going everywhere.
So, we get better performance that way.
We also get better security by having this logical addressing as well.
For example, let's say that we've got accounting servers. We can put them on one particular subnet,
and that makes it really easy to control who's got access to those servers.
Also, it makes troubleshooting easier as well because by partitioning the network in o smaller parts,
if we have a problem, it's easy to see what part of the network the problem is on and concentrate there.
So that's our Layer 3 addressing, it uses IP addresses. At Layer 2, which will get to soon in the next
section,
we have MAC addresses
if we're using Ethernet. IP addresses Layer 3. MAC addresses Layer 2. IP addresses a logical addressing
scheme.
MAC addresses is just one big flat global addressing scheme.
So you see, this section is going to be a lot longer, more involved than when we get to MAC addresses
because there's a lot more work to do here.
There's no logical separation at Layer 2, the OSI model, it's done here at Layer 3 with our IP addressing.
Okay,
this is the first lecture in our Layer 3 section. So, as usual, we'll have a review of the OSI stack again.
You're going to see this several times because it's important, and I really want to drill into you about
how networking works based on the OSI model.
So again, we've got the 7 layers. Layer 7 is the Application Layer, where when a sender is going to
send traffic, it composes the packet. It creates the Layer 7 information first. That then gets encapsulated
in the Layer 6 Presentation Layer header, then encapsulated in the Session Layer header. Top 3 Layers
are upper layers, mostly the concern of application developers. As networkers, we start getting really
interested at Layer 4, so the packet we've got Layer 7, 6, 5 then gets encapsulated with the
Layer 4 header, and that will either be a TCP or a UDP header, and the port information will be on there.
That then gets further encapsulated in the Layer 3 header, which is the subject of this section. Main
information in the Layer 3 header is the IP address information, that you'll see coming up shortly
with the rest of the information that's also in the header. Our network infrastructure device that works at Layer 3
is our routers. Then, we carry on making the packet we put on to the Layer 2 header which is
the Data-Link header on a Local Area Network that will be using Ethernet, and we'll have the source and
destination MAC address there. Our network devices that work at Layer 2 are our switches.
Finally, the packet will actually get put onto the physical wire, that's at the Physical Layer, and our hubs
work at the Physical Layer. Not that we still have hubs, we'll talk about that a bit more later too.
Okay,
last slide in this lecture, we're going to take a look at the IP header. So the top row that
you see there, first part is a 4-bit version. It's either going to be IPv4 or IPv6
that's referenced in that field. We then have the 4-bit header length, the length of the IP header. It can be
a different length because the header options that you see further down can be variable length. We then
have the type of service byte. This is used for Quality of Service information.
So we can put a marking on the packet to specify what kind of traffic this is, and on our routers later,
we can take an action based on that marking to give it better service if we need to, for example, for
our Voice over IP (VOIP) traffic. We then have the 16-bit total length of the packet. The next row underneath
is used for fragment information. With our different media types,
for example, Ethernet, there is a maximum transmission unit size, the maximum size of the packet. Maximum
size by default in Ethernet is a 1500 byte MTU.
If we try a packet onto the wire that is larger than that size, it has to get split up into smaller parts
which are called our fragments.
The second row of information on the IP header is used to help keep track of those fragments.
The next row down,
we have an 8-bit time to live (TTL) field.
Every time a packet goes through a router, the router will decrement the TTL field by one.
If it gets down to zero, then that router will drop the packet.
What this is for is to prevent routing loops.
We might have an error in our network somewhere that is causing packets to endlessly loop around the
network without ever getting to their destination.
We don't want packets to loop around forever, so TTL will prevent that and drop them.
Now, it doesn't fix the underlying problem. We still need to cure the loop. So that traffic, once
they get there, that stops us from having a huge amount of traffic getting build up on our network, slowing
it down, which is just looping. The next field, the 8-bit protocol, that will specify the Layer 4 information
type, typically, TCP or UDP.
We then have a checksum which is used to check that packet has not been corrupted in transit.
Next, we have the source IP address specifying where the packet came from and then the destination IP
address specifying where the packet is going to. The next field is the header options, where we can put
in additional information.
It's not commonly used.
And finally, we have the data,
the rest of the packet. Okay, so that is the basics of Layer 3 and the IP header, but I've got a lot
more information to tell you here. So, I'll see you in the next lecture.